let's dive a bit deeper level three is
algorithms open AI beat top pros at DOTA
in 2019 I consider this the top result
in the field how advanced was the
algorithm used for this feed pause and
guess ready the solution was Po and 158
million parameter network with a on
layer
lstm that's a model you can run at home
and while the 1024 gpus used to train it
were a lot by 2019 standards that's only
around 1% of the scale of
gp4 Po was published in 2017 and is
still the most widely used algorithm in
RL outside of maybe soft after critic in
parts of Robotics keep in mind
algorithms are academic bread and butter
there is tremendous incentive to make
progress in publish here and there have
been dozens to hundreds of papers
claiming to beat
po but none of them have caught on more
generally as you might expect from the
previous section it's a common story in
RL to try out a newly published method
on a different environment only for it
to significantly underperform the much
simpler Bas Line This is going to change
with puffer lib algorithmic progress is
not our immediate goal because it will
soon become an inevitable byproduct you
can already run exhaustive experiments
on a few environments overnight with
puffer lip as soon as we accumulate just
a few more fast environments of varying
type and complexity the pace and
accuracy of evaluating methods will
increase so so dramatically as to
virtually automate this process but
until then po solves DOTA and it will
probably solve your problem
too level four is libraries in language
and vision most researchers just need
pie torch a data set and a stack of
papers to read reinforcement learning
isn't like that our data comes from
simulators we'll talk about all the
different tools that go into dealing
with these but for now let's just look
at off the-shelf bundles of tools the
best known one is probably stable
baselines 3 which makes something
getting something working quick for
beginners tan show shares a similar
design but is much less known in the US
then there are higher perf libraries
like sample Factory and mulb which run
like Swiss watches smooth and beautiful
just don't try to modify them yourself
there's also torch lib a newer library
with quite a bit of Promise all these
take some time to learn and none of them
will suit your needs in all cases My
overall pick is clean RL which provides
short single file implementations of
major algorithms RL is an emerging field
and users need white box software that
they can easily edit any portion of so
how does puffer lib fit in our demos run
on an optimized version of clean RL with
a severalfold increase in performance
but really the core of puffer lib is not
just another training Library we instead
focus on lower level optimizations that
enable efficient and general simulation
and for that we'll have to dive
deeper this is where we start getting
into major advancements exclusive to
puffer Li level five is vectorization
the process of getting data from
parallel simulators running on different
cores to the GPU to illustrate just how
difficult this is llms with thousands of
gpus are trained on the order of tens of
terabytes of data total our single GPU
demos can consume over a terabyte of
data per hour and this is not read from
disk but gathered from over a billion
interactions with hundreds to tens of
thousands of parallel simulations
nothing else matters if you can't get
that data fast enough if your
vectorization caps out at 5,000 frames
per second your training caps out at
5,000 frames per second optimizing this
process is hard because vectorization
has to handle a ton of different types
of simulators to name but a few
complications some en very some
environments run at inconsistent rates
some have high bandwidth requirements
ments some have variable numbers of
agents and many require handling highly
structured data I rewrote this layer of
the RL stack from the ground up based on
my experience developing neural MMO
throughout my PhD puffer lip
vectorization can handle tens of
gigabytes of data per second with
virtually zero overhead from
interprocess communication you can read
the full details of our architecture in
the puffer lib white paper but as a
quick summary our biggest improvements
include optimized shared memory layout
asynchronous buffering custom signaling
between processes and multiple
strategies based on an automatic profile
of your
environment in more practical terms if
your environment is a is complex puffer
lib will make it work where Alternatives
will not run if your environment is slow
puffer lib will make it faster than
existing Alternatives and if your
environment is fast puffer lib can scale
linearly where existing methods are
often slower than single
thread level six is compatibility making
RL work with tons of different types of
simulators until just a few months ago
this was the biggest bottleneck in
pushing reinforcement learning to work
on more interesting problems and it was
the bane of my existence developing
neural MMO during my PhD I saw many
amazing RL projects fail because of it
there was just no efficient method for
getting structur data from complex
simulators into standard learning
implementations the solution was so
obvious in retrospect but I can
confidently say it is unique to puffer
lip because if anybody had come up with
a general formulation it would be
everywhere by now puffer lib packs up
all the data from your environment into
flat buffers then right before your
model needs to know the structure of
that data it unpacks it simple right
well this means that the whole
vectorization library and algorithm
layers do not need to care what your
data looks like your simulator can be
anything and you can eliminate thousands
of lines of inefficient structure data
processing code from your RL
infrastructure instead of keeping this
technique a secret I've made it
available for free in puffer
lib we're nearing the Bottom now these
are the esoteric depths where
discoveries are made level seven is
rappers code that runs on top of
existing environments to modify how they
behave wrappers are pervasive virtually
all commonly used environments have
several post-processing steps such as
gray staling or resizing frames stacking
observations together repeating actions
for multiple frames and adding extra
logging and they're almost all
unoptimized python this is the resize
operation used in the most common rapper
for Atari this one little interpolation
right here probably accounts for a
quarter of the CPU time allocated to
reinforcement learning in the last
decade I rewrote it in one line and
immediately doubled the overall training
speed of Atari with no performance
degradation shortly thereafter I found
an error in another standard rapper that
prevented Agents from learning multiple
different games the same day I removed
the rest of the python wrappers and
replace them with C++ which ironically
enough was already available in the Bas
Atari package other common errors I see
include rendering the environment at a
high resolution and then downscaling
instead of rendering at a low resolution
to begin with I found this in the
standard Doom package and got a several
fold speed up just by enabling an unused
resolution option that was in an obscure
config file for ultra high performance
environments the standard rla apis
provided by Jim and petting zoo
themselves are too slow because they
they require processing python
dictionaries though this really only
becomes a concern above a million steps
per second speaking of which level eight
is environments the set of existing
simulations available there are tons of
interesting RL environments but few of
them are fast in many cases I question
how it is even possible for them to be
this slow here's the popular crafter
environment designed in part to reduce
computational requirements it runs at
320 steps per second on a high-end
desktop and it also receives no
noticeable acceleration with standard
vectorization methods it does run up to
2,800 steps per second with puffer lib
but that's still unusably
slow the reason atrociously optimize
python this trend continues in several
other environments such as this racing
environment which runs at low hundreds
of steps per second and this traffic
simulator which somehow runs dozens of
steps per second we do have some at
least reasonably fast environments that
would be usable if we sto slowing them
down with bad wrappers I've gotten Atari
up to 60,000 frames per second on a
desktop and proc gen to 150k that's
still not amazing but it's pretty good
for something being rendered to pixels
Doom is reasonably fast as well but the
project would need quite some work some
older M's are surprisingly fast one of
my favorites being net hack which is an
80s terminal based Dungeon Crawler it's
an insanely complicated M but I can run
it at 100 100,000 steps per second in
puffer lib many environments are 10
times slower outside puffer lib
especially with gym or sp3 vectorization
but if you know of any others that are
at least fast single threaded let me
know there are some newer GPU
accelerated environments but only a few
of them like GPU Drive U Madrona
hide-and seek and craftex are complex
enough to be worth
mentioning welcome to the trenches this
is the realm of things nobody has ever
even attempted
level nine is custom simulation what if
we replaced all the standard training
environments with ones that run a
thousand times faster that's what puffer
AI is doing right now Atari games run at
a few thousand steps per second per core
this snake game runs at over 10 million
steps per second per core this common
grid environment runs at 16,000 steps
per second ours runs at over 10 million
it's not just limited to simple
simulations either this mini MOBA runs
at over a million steps per second per
core and it has many of the elements of
DOTA we have a couple more projects in
the works too so how's this possible
these simulations all run in pure C with
zero dynamic memory
allocations but provided you understand
the computational requirements of RL
they don't take that long to build most
of these are written in scon that reads
like simple procedural python the snake
and grid environments are a few hundred
lines of code each and the m is
currently around 1400 I did a port of
the snake game to Native C but really
that was just so we could run it on our
website as a demo try it
out all these Sims are publicly
available in the dev branch and you can
often find me building them live these
will be part of our next update and I
believe they will be the basis for a
whole new wave of progress in
reinforcement
learning level 10 is
open-endedness for the last stop I'd
like to talk about the only problem on
this list that I don't know how to solve
building an environment in which agents
can continue to learn and develop
interesting Solutions
forever we only have one example of what
might be an open-ended system human
civilization the original motivation for
neural MMO the topic of my PhD was to
get as close as possible to this with a
known simulation format namely MMOs or
massively multiplayer online games I
still think that this would work and
done at scale using some of the
techniques I now know could produce
something in order of a magnitude more
interesting than open AI DOTA bot
but beyond that I don't know yet if you
have any ideas let me know in the
comments but before we wrap up let's
look at the whole picture the master
plan of how puffer AI will fix
everything wrong with reinforcement
learning we're building fast simulators
of varying types and complexities these
will replace the slow simulators in
environments used in Academia and in
industry for testing new methods they
will not be slowed down by clunky
rappers or by compatibility issues they
will run with linear speed UPS across
processes fast enough to saturate even
multi-gpu machines using only locally
available cores puffer Li simple demos
already train at over a million steps
per second and will soon scale linearly
with more gpus too well we will not
initially focus on developing new
algorithms or improving sample
efficiency these improvements are
inevitable byproducts of running tens of
billions of steps per experiments per
GPU per
day if you're an industry working on
reinforcement learning our tools are
free an open source as of right now you
can also purchase extended support
priority features and other services
email J Suarez at puffer doai or message
me on X for more information we also
have special deals available for small
startups if you're an Academia and would
like to collaborate let us know puffer
AI provides free support to multiple
academic labs and we intend to expand
this program in the future and if you're
just generally interested in
reinforcement learning you can follow me
on X chat with us on Discord . g/p
puffer and swing by the dev streams to
see many of these tools being built live
thank you for your interest and don't
forget to feed the puffer